#LyX 2.2 created this file. For more info see http://www.lyx.org/
\lyxformat 508
\begin_document
\begin_header
\save_transient_properties true
\origin unavailable
\textclass extreport
\use_default_options true
\begin_modules
fixltx2e
fix-cm
theorems-ams-bytype
\end_modules
\maintain_unincluded_children false
\language british
\language_package default
\inputencoding auto
\fontencoding global
\font_roman "default" "default"
\font_sans "default" "default"
\font_typewriter "default" "default"
\font_math "auto" "auto"
\font_default_family default
\use_non_tex_fonts false
\font_sc false
\font_osf false
\font_sf_scale 100 100
\font_tt_scale 100 100
\graphics default
\default_output_format default
\output_sync 0
\bibtex_command default
\index_command default
\paperfontsize default
\spacing single
\use_hyperref false
\papersize default
\use_geometry false
\use_package amsmath 1
\use_package amssymb 1
\use_package cancel 1
\use_package esint 1
\use_package mathdots 1
\use_package mathtools 1
\use_package mhchem 1
\use_package stackrel 1
\use_package stmaryrd 1
\use_package undertilde 1
\cite_engine basic
\cite_engine_type default
\biblio_style plain
\use_bibtopic false
\use_indices false
\paperorientation portrait
\suppress_date true
\justification true
\use_refstyle 1
\index Index
\shortcut idx
\color #008000
\end_index
\secnumdepth 3
\tocdepth 1
\paragraph_separation indent
\paragraph_indentation default
\quotes_language english
\papercolumns 1
\papersides 2
\paperpagestyle default
\tracking_changes false
\output_changes false
\html_math_output 0
\html_css_as_file 0
\html_be_strict false
\end_header

\begin_body

\begin_layout Chapter
Introduction
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
With the end of the free-lunch era of ever increasing single-core performance,
 parallel computing has become a mainstream requirement.
 The multi-core era requires high-performance programs to be highly parallel:
 Moore's law is still being expressed, but the increase in transistor count
 is resulting in an increasing number of cores rather than faster cores.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
(Intro/Motivation/Background)
\end_layout

\begin_layout Itemize
Can keep this to less than 3 pages, do some why and some background.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Itemize
Interest in parallel/distributed from the 60s, much larger machines now.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Itemize
Don't try to cover all parallel/distributed approaches.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Itemize
Changes in machine, machine architecture, cache coherency, core count, expensive
 locking, shared memory available.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Itemize
Finish with a thesis outline.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Itemize
Possibly mention what's in the language that is left out.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
Single core processor performance has, for the time being, stopped keeping
 pace with Moore's Law.
 On the other hand, Moore's Law still appears to hold in the form of increasing
 per-node core counts.
 
\end_layout

\end_body
\end_document
